docs: graphql, v2, & developer onboarding (#277)
namehash/ensnode: docs/ensnode/src/content/docs/guides/understanding-ensnode-v1.mdx

---
title: Understanding ENSNode V1
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

:::note
This document assumes general knowledge of the ENS protocol and the ENS Subgraph.
:::

> ENSNode is a modern ENS indexer built on [Ponder](https://ponder.sh/) that aims to provide a more efficient, flexible, and maintainable alternative to the ENS Subgraph. ENSNode also introduces multichain indexing while maintaining backwards compatibility with existing ENS Subgraph APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ENSNode is the new multichain indexer for ENS and ENSv2. It is built on [Ponder](https://ponder.sh/) and provides enhanced capabilities over the ENS Subgraph, as well as being more efficient, flexible, and maintainable. ENSNode's enhanced capabilities include multichain and multiregistrar indexing while maintaining backwards compatibility with existing ENS Subgraph APIs.
```

## Core Design Principles

1. **Full Backwards Compatibility w/ ENS Subgraph**
    - Full support for existing ENS Subgraph queries used by [`ensjs`](https://github.com/ensdomains/ensjs/) and [`ens-app-v3`](https://github.com/ensdomains/ens-app-v3)
    - Drop-in replacement for applications using the ENS Subgraph
    - Verified compatibility through extensive testing with [`ens-test-env`](https://github.com/namehash/ens-test-env/) and [ens-subgraph-transition-tools](https://github.com/namehash/ens-subgraph-transition-tools) (see [Subgraph Compatibility](/reference/subgraph-compatibility))

2. **Multi-Registry Plugin Architecture**
    - Support for indexing ENS data across multiple chains & subregistries (i.e. mainnet, Base, Linea)
    - Plugins can be activated independently or in combination

> 3. **Built on Ponder**

Reviewer: Suggest also highlighting the following Ponder benefit: "Breaks free of the highly sandboxed constraints of the ENS Subgraph to enable more specialized indexing strategies for ENS data."

For background: All subgraphs are highly sandboxed. It sucks.

    - Improved indexing speed (>10x faster than ENS Subgraph)

>     - Isolated indexing schemas (supporting branches, staging environments)

Reviewer: What do you think about adding a reference to the benefit of ponder client queries? Appreciate your advice on how we might write that.

4. **Decentralization Approach**

>     - Self-hostable infrastructure

Reviewer: This is great. A few other related key ideas we might communicate here. I'll write this in a rough way, you're welcome to polish it up:

1. Make self-hosting easy and cheap! We might note how we're still optimizing for this goal, please be patient if not fully delivered yet.
2. NameHash Labs will host example instances of ENSNode for community use, but for production uses cases, apps with more needs should host their own instance of ENSNode.

>     - Bring-your-own Postgres

Reviewer 2: As we require ENSRainbow integration, we could mention:
> Bring-your-own ENSRainbow

What do you think, @shrugs?

Reviewer: Suggest we don't highlight Postgres or ENSRainbow in this context. This context is more big picture.

@shrugs Suggest removing the reference to Postgres here.

## General Execution Flow

The subgraph's codebase is not exhaustively documented or trivially readable. In some cases we've decided to simplify the implementation (ensuring accuracy via [ens-subgraph-transition-tools](https://github.com/namehash/ens-subgraph-transition-tools)) and in others we've elected to match the subgraph's logic closer to 1:1.

In general, however, each handler is written in a more ponder-native way, using ponder's drizzle-inspired entity CRUD apis, rather than the subgraph's active-record-inspired api. It uses minimial branched or nested logic, resulting in code that is much more readable. Along the way we've also documented the purpose of these handlers more exhaustively, which should promote understanding and readability.

## API Layer

ENSNode exposes three distinct API endpoints:

1. **Subgraph-Compatible GraphQL** (`/subgraph`)
    - Implements the ENS Subgraph schema and query patterns
    - Enables gradual migration from existing Subgraph implementations
    - Maintains compatibility with `ensjs` client library — just replace

> 2. **Native Ponder GraphQL** (`/`)

Reviewer 2: Note to myself:
- [ ] @tk-o to update Ponder GraphQL path after merging #291
